I shared this last night because it was Valentine's Day and I was like, I wonder who's gonna be at church on Valentine's Day?
And I kind of comforted myself because in Revelations 2.4 it castigates those people that have left their first love.
So I thought the people who come to church on Valentine's Day are the people who have not left their first love.
Anyway, it's a blessing to be with you this afternoon.
I'm happy to do this, happy.
Hopefully Micah is getting a good time with his family, with his wife.
I'm not exactly sure if they're alone or if they're with their family, but thankful that he has this time to be with them.
But again, hope you had a blessed weekend.
This was President's Day weekend, also Valentine's Day.
I hope you had a
a wonderful weekend or are having a wonderful weekend.
I am going to talk to you about love and I'm going to ask you the question, what is it that you love?
Oh, by the way, I know some of you tune in and hear the message at nine.
Pastor Rob was able to share.
He hasn't shared in quite a long time, but I was at the nine o'clock service.
Well worth listening to tune in and listen to that message.
It was good.
But,
What is it that you love?
You know, we know that the true test of love, of what we love, nearly always is reflected in how we choose to spend time, money, and resources.
This is where our affections are shown.
You know, I was thinking about this if like an auditor, an independent auditor came and analyzed my own life.
and somehow put into numbers documenting how I spend my time, how I spend my money, where I allocate my resources.
What would it show about my true love?
I hope it would show that my true love is the Lord, is my wife, is my family.
Jesus says in the book of Matthew, he says, out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks.
What is it that fills our heart?
It's the things that we value and the things that we love.
Jesus went on to say, he said, where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
Our deepest affections and priorities almost always follow what we value the most.
But Jesus follows up these warnings
with this simple exhortation.
It's a statement that to me distills the whole of the Christian faith.
He says, seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, then all these things shall be added unto you.
And basically Jesus is saying that when we make Jesus and his word and his righteousness, our first love, our true love,
And when we show that by prioritizing his agenda in our life, we can know that God will provide our needs and our wants in our life as he sees fit in his timing.
Revencing and loving God's word.
It's kind of what we're gonna be talking about today.
You know, there was an author that you know, Victor Hugo.
lived in the last century.
He said this.
He said England has two books, the Bible and Shakespeare.
England made Shakespeare, but the Bible made England.
I was interested that he said that about Britain at the time.
Historians tell us that Elisabethan England was indeed a country
of a book, the Bible.
And even in this country, even though our educators do their best to revise our own history, when the Pilgrim's father, when the Pilgrim fathers arrived in our nation, they brought with them that same reverence for the word of God.
We know this man.
His name's Daniel Webster.
We associate him with our dictionary.
But he lived in the newly formed United States of America.
And he said this.
He said, the Bible came with them, speaking of the pilgrims.
And it is not to be doubted that to the free and universal reading of the Bible is to be ascribed in that age that men were indebted to right views of civil liberties.
They understood that the Bible was instrumental
informing how we thought about what our nation should be, how we thought about right and wrong, the centrality of the morals that God has put in his book.
Woodrow Wilson, also someone that we know, he was our 28th president.
I don't necessarily admire him as president, but he said something profound.
He said, America was born to exemplify that devotion to the elements of righteousness which are derived
from the revelations of the scriptures.
He recognized how central the Bible was to the way we think and to the morals that we hold in our nation at that time.
Reverence and love of God's word was at the foundation of what God desired for his people, the Israelites, the Jews.
It helped make England.
It was deeply instrumental in making our own nation.
And it's what he wants for us.
It's what he wants for his people today.
But you know what?
In every case, going back, when God's people get away from reverencing and loving and reading and obeying the word of God, we go astray.
We lose the blessing of God.
And this is what I want us to consider this afternoon.
Becoming those people who once again, who are going back, who are re-embracing, listening and loving and living the word.
And we're gonna look today in Nehemiah, in the book of Nehemiah.
And I like context and I like history.
So this actually is part of our anchored reading.
It's maybe the neglected part of our anchored reading, but nonetheless it's there.
And I want to give a little context before we dive into chapter eight, which is where we're going to be.
So you guys know Israel became two kingdoms, the northern kingdom of Israel, the southern kingdom of Judah.
In 722, that northern kingdom of Israel was taken into captivity by Assyria.
And that was the time of the ministry of the prophet Isaiah.
In 586, it was the final destruction of Jerusalem after about a 20-year siege of Jerusalem by the Babylonians.
About 50 years later, that same kingdom, the Babylonians, fell to the Persians.
And all during that time were remembering Daniel because he was instrumental in that whole period of time.
In 538, there was a decree by Cyrus, the king of the Persians,
to rebuild the temple and that next year, Zerubbabel, the priest takes an expedition with many Israelites back to Jerusalem and they begin to rebuild the temple, which was completed in 516.
In 486, we have the reign of a hazardous and we remember him because that's when Queen Esther was crowned the queen.
That's in the book of Esther.
In 458,
BC, Ezra, the priest, went back to Jerusalem, and his heart was to return people to the Lord, to return God's people to the Lord.
And then here we are in Nehemiah 8, and it was in 444 BC that Nehemiah would leave the capital, the Persian capital, and he would return to Jerusalem to build the walls of Jerusalem.
At this time in the account that we're gonna be in in Nehemiah chapter eight, Nehemiah was the governor.
Ezra was the priest.
And Nehemiah would call for basically a Bible conference of the people of Jerusalem and the surrounding areas.
And he invited Ezra the priest to be the teacher.
And remember that Nehemiah had been the one that was responsible for building the wall
And at this time that was done, the walls were finished, the gates were hung, the physical rebuilding of the walls was completed.
And now it was time to focus on the spiritual rebuilding, the spiritual fortification of the people.
And chapters eight through 13 record this spiritual ministry, which we won't have time to do today, but if you go into chapter eight through 13, eight,
talks about instructing the people.
Chapter nine, they were confessing their sin.
Chapter 10 through 12, they were dedicating the walls.
And chapter 13, they were dealing with problems and cleansing the fellowship of sin.
So it's important to note that the kind of men that both Ezra, who was the priest and the spiritual leader, and Nehemiah, who was the governor and the political leader, they were leaders who
prioritize the word of God.
They were men of God's word.
Ezra 7, verse 10, records how Ezra, prior to going back to Jerusalem to do the ministry, had prepared his heart to seek the Lord and to do it and to teach the statutes to the Israelites.
And Nehemiah also was a man of God's word.
When you read through this book, the earlier chapters, you can't help but notice, first of all, how many prayers there are to God and then how many times and how deeply those prayers are rooted in his knowledge of the word.
And you know, it's important to see how they both, they put the word of God first in their own lives and in the leadership of the city.
And what happens in Jerusalem from this point on that we're gonna study forward was a result of that conviction that they had in their own hearts but also the people's response to the word as it was presented to them.
A famous pastor, Martin Lloyd-Jones says, the primary task of the church and the Christian minister is the preaching of the word.
The decadent periods in eras
in the history of the church, have always been those periods when preaching has declined.
And you know that's so true.
I just think back to stories in the Old Testament that we know.
Remember the book of Judges, that very dark time in Israel's history, and the book literally ends with these words.
The last words of the book are, in those days there was no king in Israel, and everyone
and did what was right in their own eyes.
First Samuel chapter three verse one which is basically recording the same time period events tells us it says, the word of the Lord was rare in those days and there was no widespread revelation.
God's word was not being revealed because what?
Because the preachers
weren't preaching the word.
I was thinking on that word, revelation.
And I was reminded of a proverb we all know, Proverb 2918, which says, where there is no revelation, what happens?
The people perish.
You know, we often quote that as where there is no vision, the people perish.
But I just, for the fun of it, put that verse into my little
AI Google thing to see how it would comment on that verse.
And it's response, this is Google's response to this verse commenting.
It says, this indicates that without divine revelation or guidance from God, people live without restraint, they become unruly, immoral, and spiritually lost.
Couldn't have said it better.
The spirit,
of God uses the word of God to cleanse and renew the hearts of the people of God.
And this is what we need today.
This is the renewal that we need today.
But if God is to do his work in us, we, the church, need to respond positively to his word.
And this brings us to chapter eight,
In this chapter, Nehemiah in the narrative is describing the three responses, positive responses that the Israelites had to the word of God.
And I believe it's those same three responses that we all need to have to the word of God if we want God's word to work in us.
And we see in verses one through eight,
We see that the first response was there was an understanding of the word.
They listened to it.
In verses nine through 12, there was a rejoicing in the word.
They loved it.
And then in verses 13 through 18, they obeyed the word.
They lived it.
So let's stand as I read the first eight verses of Nehemiah.
I think everyone has a Bible.
Nehemiah, chapter eight, if you don't have a Bible, raise your hand, I know one of the people back there will come and give you one if you want one.
They are yours to keep if you wanna keep it, our gift to you.
Beginning the reading, it says in chapter eight, verse one, now all the people gathered together as one man in the open square that was in front of the Watergate.
And they told Ezra the scribe to bring the book of the law of Moses, which the Lord had commanded Israel.
So Ezra the priest brought the law before the assembly of men and women and all who could hear with understanding on the first day of the seventh month.
Then he read from it in the open square that was in front of the Watergate from morning until midday before the men and the women and those who could understand and the ears of all the people were attentive to the book of the law.
So
Ezra the scribe stood on a platform, which they had made for the purpose, and beside him, at his right hand, stood Matataya, Shema, Anaya, Erija, Hilkaya, and Messiah.
And at his left hand, Padaya, Mishael, Malkaija, Hashum, Hashbedana, Zechariah, and Mashulam.
And Ezra opened the book in the sight of the people,
for he was standing above all the people, and when he opened it, all the people stood up, and as a bless the Lord, the great God.
Then all the people answered, amen, and amen, while lifting up their hands, and they bowed their heads and worshiped the Lord with their faces to the ground.
Also, Jeshua, Bani, Sherabiah, Jaiman, Akub, Shabbathai, Hodeija, Messiah, Calita,
Azariah, Josephad, Hanan, Palaia, and the Levites helped the people to understand the law.
And the people stood in their place and they read distinctly from the book in the law of God and they gave them the sense and they helped them to understand the reading.
Lord, thank you for your word and Lord, I do pray that as we study this passage today that you Holy Spirit,
would be not only renewing our understanding of this passage, but renewing our love for this wonderful book that we hold in our hand, which is your word.
And not only may we love it, but may we live it, may we obey it.
So bless this time in Jesus' name, amen.
Now in honor of this passage, I'm gonna have you keep standing.
No, I'm just kidding.
Go ahead and be seated.
The first thing that I see here as we're looking at this is that there needs to be understanding.
The first response that we need to have to God's word is to understand his word.
We need to listen to it to comprehend.
Many of us here at Godspeak, we follow the good habit of reading from scripture every day, maybe using the anchored reading as your guide,
But even if we do that, we have to be careful not just to go through our morning or evening or midday ritual and say, oh, I read my Bible today.
We need to make the effort to understand what we're reading because it's God through his word that is speaking to us.
We can't come to think of the Bible as some sort of a magic book that changes us or changes our circumstances
simply by reading or reciting it.
God's word must be understood before it can enter our hearts and release its life-changing power.
I wanna start our study by noticing a few things in these first opening verses.
First, notice how many times in this passage we see the word
understand or a word related to understand.
Look at verses two and three.
It says, So Ezra the priest brought them before the assembly of men and women and all who could hear with understanding.
And he read from it in the open square that was in front of the Watergate from morning until midday, before the men and women and those who could understand.
So this audience was full of people who could understand.
verses seven and eight.
Also, and we read those names and I don't think I have the energy to read all those names again.
Those names and the Levites helped the people to understand the law.
And the people stood in their place, verse eight.
And so they read distinctly from the book in the law of God and they gave sense and helped them to understand.
So here they were helping them to understand.
Then in verses 12 and 13, it says, And on the second day, the heads of the fathers of all the houses of the people with the priests and the Levites were gathered to Ezra the scribe in order to understand.
So six times in this passage,
we see a form of the word understand.
First of all, it was really only the people who could understand who were part of that assembly.
During the course of their meeting, they were helped to understand.
And at the end of it all, we see that they were filled with gladness because they understood.
We'll get back to that later.
But the transformative work of the word in our lives starts with understanding
the word.
We know Isaiah 55, 11, that God's word will not return void without accomplishing that which it's set forth to accomplish.
We know that God's word is a supernatural book that does a miracle in our life.
In 1 Thessalonians chapter two, verse 23, Paul says to the new Thessalonian church, he says, we thank God without ceasing because when you received the word of God, you received it not as the word of a man,
But as it is in truth, the word of God, which does what?
It effectively performs in its work in you who believe, believe.
Belief comes from understanding and it's when we believe in it that it's released to do its transforming work in it.
We know the parable of the sower in Matthew chapter 13.
where Jesus is talking about the farmer who's throwing seed out on the soil in his farm.
And Jesus compares understanding and receiving the word to planting of the seed in soil where it takes root and it ultimately bears fruit.
So understanding is important.
When we come to church, it's important that we understand
the passage, the scripture that the pastor is teaching.
Notice secondly, in Ezra, sorry, in verse one, that it is Ezra who's leading this conference.
And he was the ideal man, I think, for this outdoor Bible school, because like we said before, he was a man who had prepared his heart to seek the law, to do it, and to teach it.
He was qualified to teach it because first of all he had a prepared heart and he was seeking the knowledge of the Lord and he was practicing it in his own life and now he was able to teach it to others.
Ezra had come to Jerusalem about 14 or 15 years before Nehemiah and his heart was to bring revival to the nation of Israel back in Jerusalem again.
You know, the Bible has so much to say about we pastors who would be spiritual leaders.
God holds us as pastors to a higher accountability and how desperately we need pastors in this nation again to be preaching the word of God.
Thirdly,
Notice the leaders chose the Watergate as the location for the assembly of the reading and the teaching of the word, the Watergate.
Again, nothing in the Bible is a mistake.
In the Bible, water for washing is always a symbol of God's word.
When you go to Ephesians chapter five, that familiar passage on
marriage, talking about the husband's role.
Husbands love your wives as Christ loved the church and gave himself for her that he, speaking of both Christ and the husband's role, that he might sanctify her and cleanse her with the washing of the water by the word.
The Bible is always, I mean, the water is always a symbol of
God's word.
But water for drinking is always a symbol of God's Holy Spirit.
In John chapter four, verse 13, we know that passage, the woman at the well.
And Jesus is talking to her and says, Jesus said to her, whoever drinks of this water will thirst again, speaking of the physical water, but whoever drinks of the water that I will give him
will never thirst, speaking of the Holy Spirit.
But the water that I shall give him will become a fountain of water springing up into everlasting life.
The word, God's word and God's spirit work together.
And it's when we apply God's word to our lives that God's spirit can do his work.
I think I've quoted this before.
My grandfather would say, Alan Redpath,
He said, the word without the spirit is dead.
The spirit without the word is dangerous.
But the spirit with the word is dynamite.
And I think if you take time to ponder that, you'll see the truth in it.
Because I know so many examples of people who I consider Christians.
I don't doubt that.
But they go through life without one or the other of those two things.
And I've, you know, being honest, I've had droughts of one or the other in my own life at times.
And maybe you can relate to that.
There's a pastor named Ray Steadman, and he writes this.
He says, it's interesting, it's an interesting coincidence that in our own nation's history, the term Watergate is etched as a symbol of governmental crisis and scandal and disgrace when at the Watergate Hotel, a presidential administration ran aground.
and foundered and sank.
Yet, out of that terrible national tragedy, one Watergate figure, a White House attorney named Chuck Colson, discovered the Word of God.
And after confessing his role in the Watergate affair and turning his life over to Jesus, he emerged a changed man and he was a vital and vocal witness for the Word of God
for the word of Jesus Christ and he started the ministry of prison fellowship.
We remember Chuck Colson.
The last thing I want us to notice in this passage from verse two is that this took place on the first day of the seventh month of Tishri.
This is the Jewish equivalent of our New Year's Day.
And this seventh month was a special time in the Hebrew calendar, and I know many of you know this, a refresher for others.
Because in this seventh month, they would celebrate three important feasts consecutively.
And this passage, this whole of chapter eight, is actually taking place over the course of these three feasts being celebrated.
It started with the Feast of Trumpets on the first day of the month called Rosh Hashanah.
That word simply means head of the year.
And it's the first month of the civil calendar, Tishri is the first month of the civil calendar, the seventh month of their religious calendar.
Its name, the name for the feast of trumpets comes from the command to blow trumpets.
And it signals a new beginning.
And it marked the beginning of 10 days of consecration and repentance before God.
The second feast during that month was on the 10th day.
One we're familiar with, the Day of Atonement, also known as Yom Kippur.
And it was the most solemn of all the feast days.
It's described in Leviticus chapter 16.
And it was on this day that the High Priest would perform an elaborate and deeply symbolic ceremonial bathing and ritual.
He would sacrifice a bowl
as a sin offering for himself.
He would select two goats.
One of those goats would be sacrificed for the sins of the people.
And then he would put the sins of the people and himself upon that living goat, the scapegoat.
And that scapegoat was taken by a person appointed for that task out into the wilderness.
And that goat was set free.
And then the high priest,
would enter alone that one day a year into the holiest of holy places in the Tabernacle where the Ark of the Covenant was.
And he would sprinkle some of that blood from the sin offering on the altar.
And it was on this day, that one day a year in which the sins of the people visually were atoned for and they were removed.
Special day.
And then the last feast, the Feast of Tabernacles would take place from the 15th to the 21st day and I'll describe those later in our study.
But going back to the first eight verses, what did Ezra do?
Well, the first thing we see he did was he brought the book.
He brought the book of the law in verses one and two.
So Ezra the priest brought the law
before the assembly of men and women and all who could hear and understand.
In verse five, it says he opened the book.
Verse five says Zenezra opened the book in the sight of all the people.
In verses seven and eight, it says that he read from the book and he explained to them and helped them understand the word.
The book was
the book of the law, the scroll of the law, the Torah, the first five books of Moses, which were the foundation of the Jewish religion and civil law.
And Ezra stood on a wooden platform above them so that they could hear him and so that they could see him.
And when Ezra lifted the scroll and opened it, the people who were seated in front would honor the word and they would stand
and they remained standing while the law was read and explained.
You know, even though the people were not that familiar with it, the book was sacred to them.
It was respected.
It was reverenced.
I think our churches today have a desperate need in public services to show more respect for God's word.
Paul commands Timothy in the book of 1 Timothy chapter four, verse 13, he says, give attention to the public reading of scripture.
And yet in many churches today, Bibles are scarce.
Sermons have a lot of words and opinions, but even in them, the word of God can be rare, sometimes relegated to vague references such as the Bible says,
And then they tack on a word like God helps those who help themselves, which actually isn't even in the Bible.
You know, we wonder what the Holy Spirit when feels when he sees the word of God being left on our shelves, put on the floor, used as a portable filing cabinet for our papers.
We defend the Bible as the word of God, but we don't always treat it as the word of God.
The people reverenced the word.
And Ezra would preach from daybreak to midday, meaning the congregation listened for five to six hours standing.
And this went on for a whole week.
Again, thinking back to my time in Africa,
being the pastor of the church there.
We're used to two to three hour services and an hour and a half of preaching.
And I remember one time I had a dear friend visiting pastor and used to his own American congregation.
He gave a sermon, but it only lasted 20 minutes.
And I remember the reaction of the people when he got down, they're kind of,
Everyone's kind of silent and looking around like, what was that?
Was that the sermon?
Was it the pre-sermon?
Was it the introduction?
And I remember I had to kind of get up and re-preach his sermon because he said it was a good sermon so that everyone would understand and feel like they had a meal and not just some sort of an appetizer or something.
But you know what?
We do better here.
I'm blessed because I know people don't start getting antsy until at least the 50 minute mark.
But here it went for six hours for a whole week, how far we have come.
It says in verse eight there, it says he read distinctly, explaining the meaning.
And again, we're used to having Bibles and so many versions of the Bible, but back in that day, the common people
certainly didn't have the scriptures like we do.
And most people didn't own copies of the scriptures.
So they were thrilled to be hearing the word of God.
But that word distinctly is important.
It means that the law was explained in a language that they could understand.
It was translated and expounded in such a way that the people were able to apply it to their own lives.
It was applicable.
It was understandable.
The Hebrew language would have undergone some changes from Ezra's day to when that was first written in Moses' day, because language changes.
We need translations of the Bible, not because the Bible changes, but because our language changes.
If I put this up here on the screen, would you recognize that passage?
It's not eighth graders notes from history class.
And it's not some sort of a coded message.
But would you be able to recognize where this is from?
You know, I was trying to type this into my computer, and my computer wouldn't let me, it kept on spell checking everything.
So I finally had to copy and paste it.
But what it is, it's John Wycliffe's version of the Bible, the oldest version of English.
and you can see it up there now, it's a little easier for us to understand.
But Wycliffe's translation was in 1382, that's about 650 years ago.
Between Moses writing the law and Ezra reading the law here in Nehemiah chapter eight, a thousand years had passed.
So you can see the importance of distinctly reading, of helping them to understand what the Bible meant.
So we see there that Ezra bought the book, he opened it, he read it to bring understanding to the people.
And the question I have for us here is, are we people who revere the word of God?
Are we listening to God's word such that we understand it?
As we go on in this passage from verses nine through 12, we see that we must not only respond with understanding, we also need to respond with rejoicing.
We need to be a people who listen to the word of God, but also people who rejoice in the word of God.
Verse nine says in Nehemiah who was the governor, Ezra the priest and the scribe and the Levites who taught the people said to the people, this day is holy to the Lord.
Do not mourn or weep for all the people wept when they heard the words of the law.
Then he said to them, go your way, eat the fat, drink the sweet and send portions to those for whom nothing is prepared for this day is holy to the Lord.
Do not sorrow for the joy of the Lord is your strength.
So the Levites quieted all the people saying, be still for the day is holy.
Do not be grieved.
And all the people went their way to eat and drink and to send portions and to rejoice greatly because they understood the words that were declared to them.
As Ezra explained the word, the assembly's first response was conviction and grief for all the people wept when they heard the words of the law.
They were hearing things that convicted them that they had neglected and they felt guilty for it.
And you know what?
That's okay.
It's good to be convicted by God's word.
but it's not where God wanted them to stay, and it's not where God wants us to stay, to stay in that place of perpetual guilt.
And Nehemiah had to convince the people to stop mourning and to start celebrating.
He said, do not sorrow for the joy of the Lord is your strength.
How many of you knew that that passage which we talk about, which we quote so often, the joy of the Lord is your strength comes from Nehemiah in this context?
So many people think it comes from the book of Psalms or something.
But it comes from this.
Romans three, sorry, chapter three, verse 20 says that by the law is the knowledge of sin.
And they were mourning over their sin and the neglect of God and his word.
But notice that at this point in the text, remember I said that this passage takes place over the course of these feast days.
At this point in the text, they had observed the day of atonement.
And they had had the knowledge that God had dealt with their sins.
Their sins were removed from them and they should have been rejoicing in the knowledge of that forgiveness.
And notice what verse 12 says.
All the people went their way to eat and drink and send portions and rejoice.
Why?
Because they understood the words that were declared to them.
They understood that their sin
They understood their sin, but more than that they understood the forgiveness and atonement made for them and they had joy.
Do you have this joy?
Do you have the joy that every Christian should be skipping about?
You know, Christians should be the most joyful people around.
Romans chapter eight verse one expresses the New Testament truth
in this Old Testament symbol.
And this verse, I think, is the starting point for all true rejoicing that Christians should have.
Romans 8.1, there is now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus, for those who do not walk according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit.
That's such a wonderful verse.
The knowledge that though we have
sin, though we have transgressed God's law in every single way.
And yet God loved me and he loves me.
And by faith in who he is and what he has done, he has made a way for me to escape.
The consequences of my sin should bring me so much joy over and over and over again.
I listened over this past week to
I guess it's the final words, a testimony of an actor that maybe a lot of you know, and I don't normally get on these channels, but I happened upon it, his name is James Vanderbeek, and maybe you guys know him better than I do, an actor who is apparently well-known, died February 11th.
But he posted something on Instagram that I listened to, and I thought it was profound.
Not necessarily because everything he said was doctrinally correct,
but because it was just so sincere and real.
And I'm paraphrasing what he said here.
And I'm sure you can watch it yourself, but he talks about how when he was young, he defined himself in various ways as a successful actor, a husband who loved his wife, a father who loved his children and provided for his family, apparently owned a farm and he was a farmer who was
a good and productive steward of his land.
And then he said, I got cancer.
And slowly all those identities were stripped away as I could no longer do any of them.
And the question would often pose itself to me, who am I?
What am I?
Eventually I had to come nose to nose with death.
as I could no longer be or do any of those things.
And my identities had all been taken away.
I came to ask myself, if I'm just a weak, helpless, too skinny man who can't provide for his wife or his family, I'm alone in an apartment living with terminal cancer.
What am I?
And after meditating and pondering this question, I came to this conclusion.
I am worthy.
of God's love simply because I exist.
And if God loves me, certainly I can love myself.
And if that's true for me, it's true for you.
I don't know the real state of his Christianity, but that statement, I am worthy of God's love simply because I exist is true.
John 3.16, for God so loved the world that he gave his son.
John 3.17, for God did not come into the world to condemn the world, but to save the world, but that through him the world might be saved.
First John 4.19, we love him, why?
Because he first loved us.
Romans 5.8, while God
showed his love to us in that while we were yet sinners, while we were in the mire, when we were ugly, when we had not done anything to earn the love of God, he loved us.
That's what Romans 5.8 says.
The basis of all our rejoicing is the simple message.
God loves you and has made a way for you to have salvation and have eternal life.
That's the basis of our rejoicing.
But that's just the beginning.
There's so much more.
As God's children, we know, we carry burdens, we know sorrow, we know what it is to weep, we know what it is to have disappointment.
But as His children, we also have seen and experienced God's miraculous power that transforms that very sorrow into joy.
A joy that is our strength and that carries us through
those very challenges.
He gives us that grace to go through those hard trials of life.
As we open the word to read, to understand, the secret to Christian joy is to have faith, to believe what God says in his word and to act upon it.
That's the secret to it.
Warren Wearsby, one of my favorite commentators says, faith that is not based on the word is not faith.
It is presumption or superstition.
Joy that is not the result of faith is not joy, only a good feeling that will soon disappear.
Faith based on the word will produce joy that will weather the storms of life.
When we read the word, we must rejoice in the word for the treasures it contains.
Psalm 119, 162 says, I rejoice at your word as one who finds great measure.
You know, we're familiar with the parable that Jesus taught of the farmer who found treasure in his field.
And in that day, people sometimes hid their treasures in field.
And if a farmer was plowing the field and he suddenly discovered a jar filled with money or gold, he certainly would rejoice.
There are great treasures.
in the word of God, but we must dig for them as we read, as we meditate, as we pray, and when we find them, we do rejoice.
If we read the word of God out of duty, that treasure may never be revealed to us.
It is the expectant believer who delights to read and study day by day who will find the treasures within.
Psalm 112 says, blessed is the man who fears the Lord
and who finds great delight in his commands.
Amen.
Do you delight in God's word?
Do you look forward to your time opening God's word and reading it and having that fellowship?
Would you rather have God's word than food or your phone?
There's a lot of competition between these two things, isn't there?
We must listen to understand.
We must rejoice.
We must love the word.
But lastly, we must live the word.
We must obey it.
Verse 13 says now on the second day, the heads of the fathers of the houses of all the people with the priests and the Levites were gathered to Ezra the scribe in order to understand the words and they found written in the law
which the Lord had commanded by Moses, that the children of Israel should dwell in booths during the feast of the seventh month and that they should announce and proclaim in all the cities saying go out to the mountains and bring all of branches and of oil trees and myrtle branches and palm branches and make booths as it is written.
And the people went out and they brought them and they made booths each one on the roof of his house or in their courtyards or in the courts of the house of God.
or in the open square of the Watergate, or in the open square of the gate of Ephraim.
So the whole assembly of those who had returned from captivity made booths and sat under them.
For since the days of Joshua the son of none until that day, the children of Israel had not done so.
And there was a very great gladness.
And day by day, from the first day until the last, he read, Ezra read from the book of the law.
And they kept the feast seven days.
And on the eighth day there was a great assembly.
They had understood the word, they had rejoiced in the word, and now reading it, they're understanding it, they're obeying it.
And it says in verse 17, in their obedience to it, there was great gladness.
As they understood, oh, this is what we need to do, we haven't been doing this in a while, we haven't been giving it attention.
We're supposed to go out and build these booths.
And so they did it, and they had joy in simply being obedient to what God had told them to do.
You know, the day of atonement, we said, was celebrated on the 10th day.
And the feast of tabernacles was five days later from the 15th to the 21st day.
And so the leaders just had a few days to get the word out to all the people that this is what they were gonna do.
And during the seven days of this feast, the Jews would live in the tents or the booths made of branches.
And it was a time of reflection.
They would reflect back on their time in the wilderness.
they would reflect on their present situation.
It was the harvest time and they were thankful to the Lord for his provision.
It was a time of looking forward to the kingdom that God had promised them.
It was a week long joyful festival focused on the goodness of God.
And during this time, maybe where there was despondency or depression or anxiety, it was replaced with anticipation of hope and joy because
You know, they still had a lot of work to do.
There was still a lot of work in Jerusalem to do, but they had a new joy, and that joy of the Lord was giving them strength.
Their celebration was not just for enjoyment, but for encouragement to keep going.
It's not enough to just hear the word.
James 1 tells us we must be not only hearers, but what?
Doers of the word.
And the Bible says that the joy of the Lord is our strength.
The world's joy is temporary.
But the joy that comes from knowing and rejoicing and obedience to the word is everlasting.
It enriches our life.
We've experienced it.
We've experienced how the simple,
Joy in the knowledge of God and what he's done for us makes our daily tasks, some of which seems so mundane.
He gives us strength to do those tasks with joy.
To the believer without joy, God's will is punishment.
But to the believer happy in the Lord, the will of God is nourishment.
It is hope, it's confidence, it's assurance, it's purpose.
Matthew Henry writes, he says, holy joy,
will be the oil to the wheels of obedience.
And when our obedience to the word comes out of celebration, our service will be a delight and not a drudgery.
How true that is.
Did this celebration last?
Did the revival of Ezra and Nehemiah last?
Well, it did for a time until the people became careless
and the leaders had to bring them back to the word.
And it's the same in our day.
There was a man who cynically asked a famous evangelist, Billy Sunday.
He asked him, do revivals really last?
In other words, are they really worthwhile?
And Billy Sunday's response was perfect.
He says, no, but neither does a bath.
It's good to have them occasionally.
Let us become people who listen to the word, who love the word, who live the word.
From time to time in the history of the church, God's spirit has burdened God's people to pray, to search the scriptures and to confess their sins.
And from these sincere spiritual exercises, he has seen fit to bring fresh life to his people.
It happened in Nehemiah's day.
And it can happen again today.
And the question is, can it begin with you?
We know this verse from Second Chronicles chapter seven, beginning in verse 13.
It says, if my people who are called by my name will humble themselves and pray and seek my face and turn from their wicked ways, then I will hear from heaven and I will forgive their sin.
and I will heal their land.
And that begins with us.
We want it to happen in our nation, but it needs to begin with us personally.
Amen.
Father, we thank you for this chapter in which we see the people, your people, responding to your word.
And they responded with understanding, they responded with rejoicing,
They responded with obeying.
They listened to your word.
They loved your word.
They lived your word.
Lord, would you do that new work in us?
Would you bring us back to that place where we reverence this amazing book that you've given us?
That we would recognize that it is
a supernatural book.
It is the amazing story of God's love for humankind.
And all that he has done, first to create, then to provide, then to bring salvation to, and the glorious future he has for them.
Lord, would we cherish this?
And every time we open it, may we be people who rejoice at where we're gonna find in it.
Lord, would you re-stoke that love for you and for
the words that you have spoken to us.
And Lord, those things that you show us may we be people who obey them.
Not just people who talk about them, but may we be people who obey them.
And may the joy of the Lord be our strength.
May the tasks that you call us into in the highways and byways of our life.
Lord, may they be done in that joyful and hopeful and confident expectation that you are with us.
and that you will never leave us.
Thank you, Lord, for everyone who's come here today.
Lord, I pray that you will, you, by your Holy Spirit, will have been speaking to their heart.
May they go with your blessing today.
May you continue to speak to them in Jesus' name.
Amen.